Tutorial for backend with SQL [16577] (#113)
eProsima/vulcanexus: docs/rst/tutorials/tools/monitor_sql/monitor_sql.rst

.. _tutorials_tools_monitor_sql:

Fast DDS Statistics Backend Monitoring to SQL
=============================================

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

Background
----------

Vulcanexus integrates :ref:`fastdds_statistics_backend`, which is a useful tool for monitoring and studying a ROS 2 network since ROS 2 relies on the `DDS specification <https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS/1.4/About-DDS/>`_ to communicate the different nodes.
The interaction with this tool is through a C++ API.
This could be done to create powerful monitoring tools specialized by the user.
In this tutorial we show how to create an application of a :ref:`fastdds_statistics_backend` connected with a SQL in-disk database.

> .. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/sql_monitor_backend/summary.png

Reviewer: Oh sorry, I was referring to image `database.png`.

This tutorial assumes that the user has already finished :ref:`previous tutorial <tutorials_tools_monitor_with_backend>`
and understand how the *Fast DDS Statistics Backend* works and how to interact with it.
The final application created will store latency and throughput data of :code:`chatter` topic in an in-disk relation SQL database.

Prerequisites
-------------

It is required to have previously installed Vulcanexus using one of the following installation methods:

* :ref:`linux_binary_installation`
* :ref:`linux_source_installation`
* :ref:`docker_installation`

Ensure that the Vulcanexus installation includes Vulcanexus Tools (either ``vulcanexus-humble-desktop``, ``vulcanexus-humble-tools``, or ``vulcanexus-humble-base``).

.. note::

    This tutorial uses SQLite3 as SQL library to connect with an in-disk database.

>     This SQLite3 is already installed in ROS2 environment.

Author: sure about `the`? Vulcanexus :+1:

Resultant Database
------------------

This tutorial executable :code:`monitor_sql_tutorial` produces a database stored with name :code:`vulcanexus_monitor.db` in the workspace where executed.
This database contains one table called :code:`data` with 3 columns:

* **timestamp [key]** *milliseconds since epoch* Time since epoch in milliseconds
* **latency_median** *nanoseconds* Median of Latency in the interval :code:`timestamp - 5000 : timestamp`
* **throughput_median** *MB/second* Median of Throughput in the interval :code:`timestamp - 5000 : timestamp`

Each 5000 ms the program calls the *Statistics Backend* API and store the results for latency median and
throughput mean for all Nodes using :code:`chatter` topic.

> The :code:`timestamp` column is the **key** of the table as it cannot be repeated.

Author: Indeed, it is only for this tutorial. I think the SQL details must be designed by the final user

It is stored as a number and not a string or timestamp to simplify the tutorial.

There is a useful browser application to see the data inside a database file: `<http://inloop.github.io/sqlite-viewer/>`__.
The resultant database will look like this:

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/sql_monitor_backend/database.png

.. warning::

    It is possible that some data is not available because it is not being published from the entities.
    In these cases *Statistics Backend* returns :code:`NaN`
    This is parsed as a :code:`0` when inserted in the database to avoid format issues.

Creating the monitor package and application
--------------------------------------------

This section explains the source code required to implement this tutorial.
However, some code is reused from :ref:`previous tutorial <tutorials_tools_monitor_with_backend>` and will not be repeated here.

Creating the application workspace
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The application workspace will have the following structure at the end of the project.

Reviewer: NIT: an include folder is also created in the workspace.

> The application workspace will have the following structure at the end of the project.

Author: Yes, but it is useles... I add a comment about it in the proper command

In exit, it closes the database.

.. literalinclude:: /../code/monitor_sql_tutorial/src/sql_monitor.cpp
    :language: C++
    :lines: 176-197

The routine to store new data in the database firstly call the *Statistics Bakend*.
Then it loads the data received in a query previously written.
Finally it executes the query to insert the data.

.. literalinclude:: /../code/monitor_sql_tutorial/src/sql_monitor.cpp
    :language: C++
    :lines: 204-225

The queries used to interact with the database are defined inside the class as static const variables.

.. literalinclude:: /../code/monitor_sql_tutorial/src/sql_monitor.cpp
    :language: C++
    :lines: 229-238

Finally, the monitor application is initialized and run in ``main`` function.

.. literalinclude:: /../code/monitor_sql_tutorial/src/sql_monitor.cpp
    :language: C++
    :lines: 251-260

CMakeLists.txt
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Include at the end of the `CMakeList.txt` file you created earlier the following code snippet.
This adds all the source files needed to build the executable, and links the executable and the library together.

.. literalinclude:: /../code/monitor_sql_tutorial/CMakeLists.txt
    :language: cmake

>     :lines: 40-49

Reviewer: Wrong end?

Reviewer: Also, typo *CMakeList.txt*

Reviewer: Typo still there.

This file can also be downloaded with this command in `ros_ws/src/monitor_sql_tutorial` directory:

.. code-block:: bash

    wget -O CMakeList.txt \
        https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/main/code/monitor_sql_tutorial/CMakeLists.txt

Running the application
-----------------------

At this point the project is ready for building, compiling and running the application.
From the base workspace directory (`ros_ws`), run the following commands.

.. code-block:: bash

    colcon build
    source install/setup.bash
    ros2 run monitor_sql_tutorial monitor_sql_tutorial

> Then open two more terminals and load the Vulcanexus environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now open two more terminals and load the Vulcanexus environment.
```

> Then, in one of them run a ``talker`` and in the other one a ``listener`` of the ``demo_nodes_cpp`` ROS 2 package, available in the Vulcanexus Desktop distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, run a ``talker`` and a ``listener`` of the ``demo_nodes_cpp`` ROS 2 package, available in the Vulcanexus Desktop distribution, in a different terminal each.
```

*   Terminal 1:

    .. code-block:: bash

        source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
        export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;PUBLICATION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC"
        ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp talker

*   Terminal 2:

    .. code-block:: bash

        source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
        export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;PUBLICATION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC"
        ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp listener

.. note::

    In order to monitor other *statistics topics*, add them to environment variable :code:`FASTDDS_STATISTICS`.
    Check the *statistics topics* available in the `Fast DDS Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/statistics/dds_layer/topic_names.html#statistics-topic-names>`_.

Next steps
----------

Now you can develop more functionalities in your application, such as collecting more performance data or monitoring other topics.

> You can check also :ref:`this tutorial <tutorials_tools_prometheus>` explaining how to connect an application developed with the *Fast DDS Statistics Backend* to a visualization tool like *Grafana*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may also check :ref:`this tutorial <tutorials_tools_prometheus>` explaining how to connect an application developed with the *Fast DDS Statistics Backend* to a visualization tool like *Grafana*.
```
